---
layout : default
title : "Minimum Viable Product (MVP) - What It Is and How to Get Started"
date : 2014-11-14
---

# {{page.title}}
## What is a minimum viable product (MVP)?
In simple terms, a minimum viable product (MVP) is the most basic version of a product that you can create to start selling it. The concept of the minimum viable product, or MVP, was first introduced by Lean Startup genius Eric Ries. He <ins>defines the MVP</ins> as:
_“The version of a new product which allows a team to collect the maximum amount of validated learning about customers with the least effort.”_
## Importance and benefits of implementing MVPs
The idea of a minimum viable product (MVP) comes from the lean startup approach, which emphasizes learning and growing in a manageable way. By starting with an MVP, you create a basic version of your product that lets you test the market with minimal risk to your finances and business. This initial step helps you understand how interested customers are in your product and shows you what changes or improvements are needed.
Focusing on an MVP offers several benefits, such as saving money, gaining insights into what users really want, launching your business quickly, and attracting early investors. The feedback and support you get from testing your MVP can guide you in building a better final product that meets both your and your customers' needs.
## Setting up an effective MVP
Creating your minimum viable product (MVP) can be challenging, but it's a crucial part of your business strategy. Your MVP should focus on solving customer problems, gathering feedback, and include only a few essential features. It acts as a testing ground for your business idea, allowing you to measure the costs and effectiveness of those key features while demonstrating its value to customers and potential investors.
Defining your MVP involves clear brainstorming and validation, which requires teamwork and flexibility. Here are the common steps to achieve an MVP:
### 1. Identify the pain points faced by customers
To develop a minimum viable product (MVP) like Uber, it’s essential to understand the problem you’re trying to solve. In this case, the founders identified the difficulty of hailing a cab in certain situations, such as late at night or during bad weather. They aimed to create a solution that allows users to easily request a ride using their smartphones.
To gather valuable insights for your MVP, you can conduct market research that includes the following steps:
* Competitive analysis
* Opportunity and SWOT analysis
* Surveys, 1:1 interviews
* Focus groups
Once you’ve gathered qualitative insights from your research and interviews, the next critical step is to validate those findings with quantitative data. This validation process will enhance your understanding of your customers' needs and pain points, help you identify the essential features your product must have to deliver value, and provide compelling testimonials that can support your case during investment discussions.
From their preliminary research, Garret Camp and Travis Kalanick were able to validate their findings and identify the core need for a more accessible taxi service. They developed “UberCab,” the first iteration of the Uber app, which allowed users to request a cab via SMS. This MVP was a straightforward solution that addressed the immediate pain point of hailing a taxi, providing a simple and effective means of transportation without the complexities of traditional taxi services.
The success of this MVP paved the way for future iterations of the app, which incorporated additional features based on user feedback and market demands. The initial simplicity of the SMS-based service allowed them to test their concept quickly and efficiently, leading to the robust platform we know today.
By following a similar approach, you can ensure that your MVP is grounded in real user needs and backed by data, setting a solid foundation for future growth and investment opportunities.
### 2. Elaborate the competitive landscape
In 2006, your cab-hailing service likely faced minimal competition. However, by 2023, the ride-sharing landscape is saturated, with numerous apps offering similar services. What will differentiate your service from the rest? What needs or desires do customers still have that are not being met? Additionally, what is the financial impact of these pain points on customers? Create a pros and cons list that highlights how your service can outperform the competition.
### 3. Test the MVP for validity
Select a beta group or internal testers from your team to evaluate the initial technology, whether it’s a landing page, an SMS line (similar to early Uber), or a simple one-page app. Adhere to deadlines and have your testing team concentrate on functionality and how well it addresses user pain points. This process will assist you in generating ideas and identifying areas for improvement and refinement before launching the product to early adopters.
### 4. Get ready to launch
If your MVP successfully completes the testing phase, congratulations! You've developed something noteworthy. Now it's time to conduct further research, enhance your product, test it again, make necessary adjustments, launch, and keep the ideation process going. Once you've finalized the key features identified from the beginning, you can introduce the MVP to your initial customer base and initiate the build-measure-learn (BML) feedback loop.
## What are some real MVPs examples?
The MVP is not merely a testing ground or prototype that will be disregarded over time. Many products and services in the market began as MVPs and have since evolved into established entities in their own right.
### Amazon
In the early 90s, Jeff Bezos recognized that the e-commerce industry was poised to become a major player in sales and seized the opportunity to explore which markets would thrive. He ultimately decided to start with a bookstore as his minimum viable product, operating it from his garage. The success of this bookstore created a demand for other products, such as electronics, clothing, and shoes. This initial step—using books as the MVP—provided him with valuable customer insights that propelled Amazon to new heights. Who could have imagined that a small bookstore on a simple webpage would grow into the third-largest enterprise in the world in just 20 years?
### Uber
Indeed, the ride-sharing app we all know and love didn't initially launch as a mobile application. Founders Garret Camp and Travis Kalanick began by leveraging the concept of an MVP to create an iPhone-only SMS service called UberCab in San Francisco. They tested and refined the user experience within the city before securing venture capital to develop the app that now facilitates 19 million trips globally each day.
Uber has undergone numerous iterations, broadening its services year after year based on feedback from its users. While UberCab started with just taxis, the second phase of Uber introduced black cars and independent contractors as drivers, shaping the ride-sharing experience we utilize today. Through these various iterations, Uber has expanded far beyond its MVP to include pooled rides, accessible ride options, and, in select markets, even helicopter services.
## Beyond MVPs
The MVP is not the ultimate solution for your business. In fact, the concept has evolved into more sophisticated approaches, such as the Minimum Lovable Product (MLP) and the Minimum Marketable Product (MMP).
The Minimum Lovable Product (MLP) focuses on creating a customer-centric product that users genuinely appreciate from the outset. It is characterized by its essential features that ensure it resonates with users. The concept of lovability is rooted in the customer experience, addressing specific problems that users want solved. While the MLP may face competition in an existing market, it stands out as the preferred choice due to its cost-effectiveness, superior solutions, or user-friendliness. In contrast to the MVP, which emphasizes getting to market quickly and affordably, the MLP prioritizes delivering maximum value to the customer.
The Minimum Marketable Product (MMP) represents the next phase, where either your MVP or MLP is ready for sale to end users. The MMP is the simplest version of the product that the market will accept before additional features are introduced. At this stage, you have developed your product and validated its value through testing. Unlike the MVP, which may still be a prototype, the MMP is fully prepared for early adopters. For example, Spotify began as a landing page as its MVP. Once they developed an app and a subscription service, they launched it into the market as the MMP.
